---
layout: post
title: "Changes Command"
date: 2019-11-25
---

## Motivation

This program is a linux bash script that I created for myself to find what changes were being made in a specified file path.  I was doing work in a server for Welltok, and was testing out changes to the deployment process.  To help myself understand the process itself a bit better, I wanted to see what files were changed and how.  I looked for some solutions online, finding many simpler solutions.  However, the ones I found all had problems with them:
 - They didn't give me enough information (either sorted by time changed, or only listed time changed)
 - They didn't work on large amounts of files
 - They had external dependencies, which I couldn't and wouldn't put onto our servers.  Initializing the server as a git repo had all of the behavior I was looking for, but this was not in the server.
So, I set out to create a simple bash script which I could run to do this for myself.

## Algorithm

The basic idea of the algorithm was to get a dictionary of all the files in the specified directory, with the filepaths as keys and the checksum as the value (used md5sum).  Then, after waiting for user input, it would create another dictionary of the files, and compare the two.  In the comparison, the script prints out all of the files with changes, and specifies whether they were added, deleted, or modified.

After creating this base for the program, I added options to specify whether it should be a recursive search, the depth of recursion, and watching.  Watching just continuously checks, and prints out whatever changes it finds in the search, without waiting for user input.

## Testing

After getting a little bit more into this program a little bit, and wanting to test all of the options I put in, I tried to figure out how to go about it.  This was surprisingly difficult to pull off, at least with the technique that I used.  Since the program depends on user input, there was a bit of complexity added to the mix.  I was able to simulate this by creating 'expect' scripts, which can input user input in between commands.  This allowed me to create a test directory tree, start the program, make changes to those files, then put in user input to get the output.  By parsing the output, and creating good test cases, I was able to identify several issues in my program which I hand't imagined beforehand (like permissions and odd filenames), and prevent myself from breaking old functionality when adding new features.

## Potential Improvements

There are a LOT of improvements that could be made for this program.  To list out a few...
 - Use 'ls' instead of 'cd' to get files
 - Spawn processes to build hashmap
 - Ignore patterns option
 - Show files being moved (instead of deleted and added)
 - Show directories being added/removed
 - Fix bugs with weird filepaths

## Lessons

There are a few things that I learned from this experience.  For one thing, I learned how to write bash scripts properly, with argument parsing, input validation, and the syntax in general, since I hadn't really worked with bash scripts before this.  Apart from this, I was able to experience firsthand how crucial testing can be.  Normally, when writing tests for my own small programs, I have an idea of what is going to go wrong before running the tests to validate.  However, I was genuinely able to hit edge cases which I wouldn't have otherwise thought would cause issues.  While this took more effort than I would have imagined, it helped me to debug several issues which were invisible to me prior, making the process worthwhile..

### Repository link:

This repository is currently set to private, since I don't want people using my buggy code as of now, but will make public once that is fixed.  Feel free to contact me to get access.
<a href="https://github.com/andrewroc30/changes" target="_blank">https://github.com/andrewroc30/changes</a>
